Culture in my island is very strong.
For example, the head of the family can choose the family's religion
and also who they will marry.
One day, many family members of a boy that my father wanted me to marry
came to visit my father.
The purpose was that they could request that we would be married.
I respectfully explain that I could not do that.
So my father started beating me.
The first blow with the rod was very painful.
But Jehovah helped me by moving Mama to act as if she would help him to beat me.
But instead, she didn't actually beat me.
For six months, he imprisoned me in the house and he assigned me various hard jobs to do.
The thing that was the most difficult for me was not being with the brothers and sisters
doing spiritual activities for Jehovah.
But what really strengthened me was the gift of prayer.
I would pray constantly and talk to Jehovah through prayer.
When I would do the meetings by myself, I would make a schedule on Saturday night.
Then on Sunday, when all my family went to church,
I would start by praying, singing, read the paragraph, raise my hand,
and I would answer the questions myself.
It was as if I was with my brothers and sisters at the meeting.
Also, I would wait to see my younger cousins every Sunday as they walked by,
because I knew they would visit my studies and return visits.
I just went to the kitchen to wait.
I waited for them and watched them go by, looking forward to being able to see them.
Even though they didn't see me, only I saw them.
And when they passed by, I saw that they went to preach where the Bible students were.
I really felt strengthened, happy.
During those trials I had to endure, there were times I was very scared, frightened.
I really needed the courage that Jehovah supplies.
That is why I begged Jehovah for courage.
And immediately, Jehovah gave me courage so that I didn't have to be afraid anymore.
I had peace and I was able to endure those trials.
By helping me to endure that test,
Jehovah helped me to experience the blessings that I'm having today.
Now, I am really happy.
In 2013, we decided to make a move from the United States to the Marshall Islands.
We have a combined family, nine children and 24 grandchildren.
We had a middle-income family,
and you know, you have everything at your disposal.
It was a big adjustment to move where we knew that we wouldn't have those conveniences.
Life here is very different from the United States.
Many of the houses don't have kitchens or indoor bathrooms.
And so even the house that we rented, there was no stove or refrigerator.
I was very apprehensive about making the move.
It's a little bit harder for older ones to learn a little language.
And so how would I be able to conduct Bible studies?
How would I be able to, as an elder, to be able to help out within the congregation?
I had one study who had a really fierce dog,
and I really didn't want to go back to that house.
But I went back to have the Bible study, and I didn't see the dog.
So I asked her, well, where is the dog?
And she said, my uncle ate him.
At 2 Chronicles 157, it says that, do not be discouraged.
There exists a reward for your activity.
And so we visited and asserted ourselves in the work.
So immediately we had like 10 Bible studies in two weeks.
But the benefit of that is we would go over maybe chapter 1, 10 times.
And so through repetition and through due diligence,
it really facilitated us learning the language
and being able to use it to start with people
and help them to come to know your home.
I'm a bit afraid of water.
We're on an island.
You know, here I'm surrounded by water, and I cannot swim.
I had a campaign recently to preach through the outer islands.
So I have to think about the people.
When I think about their desire to learn more about God,
their love for God, their love and respect for the Bible,
it really motivates me to keep going, in spite of my fears.
And when you think about going from door to door,
and every person will stop, stop what they're doing
to talk to you about God.
They'll accept the literature.
They want Bible studies.
It's really a pioneer's dream.
Their desire, their love for the truth
and wanting to know about Jehovah, that's an additional blessing.
That is encouraging strength in us.
She says, it's a pioneer dream.
I say it's a pioneer's paradise.